Let's use our heart or an intuition to solve this data breach case.
You have alerts set up on
several dark websites for information related to your organization.
You receive an alert that has a list of
documents that appear to have originated within your company.
Your first thought is you have been attacked and your systems have been breached.
You quickly notify management and shift into incident response mode.
You scour the trail from outside your organization all the way to
the database the data resides on looking for openings, none detected.
You know your database is encrypted as is the storage it resides on,
there doesn't seem to be any misconfigurations.
Your knowledge and experience tells you that most encryption is transparent to
the user as long as they have appropriate login credentials and an authorized machine.
Your intuition is telling you,
this is an insider threat.
You quickly get permission to deploy honey tokens in
the form of documents that are similar to the ones taken.
A honey token or canary token,
is a file or record that is designed to be
abused and leave a trail leading back to the offender.
Within 48 hours, you receive two alerts.
One, new dark web alert and the other from the honey
token leading back to the employee leaking the data.
The employee was leaving the company soon after being passed
over for promotion and wanted to cause damage on the way out.